###Mutations, Deletions, Duplications & Repair

* * * * *

**Repairing damaged DNA:** Mistakes are made during DNA synthesis and
DNA can be damaged by environmental factors, which include radiation,
ingested chemicals and reactive compounds made by the cell itself.

Moreover, in aqueous solution DNA is not particularly stable.

For example, cytosine can react with water, which is present at a
concentration of \~55 M inside a cell. It undergoes a deamination
reaction to form uracil.

![*Figure: Cytosine deamination*](./img/CytosineDeamination.jpg)

Uracil is not normally found in DNA, so its presence can be easily
recognized as a mistake by the enzyme uracil-DNA-N-glycosidase
[[link](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/643602)].

This enzyme severs the tie between the base and the deoxyribose group.
This reaction is similar to a process that occurs spontaneously, that is
without an enzyme. The bond between the base and the sugar can be
hydrolyzed and the base lost.

![*Figure: Spontaneous loss of a base*](./img/LostBase.jpg)

This reaction leads to depurination - the loss of an cytosine or thymine
group, or depyrimidination - the loss of an adenine or guanine group.

The reaction rate is increased at acidic pH, which is probably one
reason that the cytoplasm is not acidic.

How frequent is this event? A human body contains \~10^14^ cells. Each
cell contains about \~10^9^ base pairs of DNA. Each cell (whether it is
dividing or not) undergoes \~10,000 base loss events per day or \~10^18^
events per day per person. That’s a lot!

The absence of a base, due either to spontaneous loss or enzymatic
removal, acts as a signal for the enzyme AP (absent purine/absent
pyrimidine) endonuclease [[OMIM](http://omim.org/entry/300773)].

> An endonuclease is an enzyme that catalyzes the breading of a bond
between nucleotide moieties within a nucleic chain; an exonuclease
catalyzes the breaking of the bond that connects the terminal nucleotide
moiety to the nucleic acid chain.  A 5’ exonuclease cuts the nucleotide
off the 5’ end of the molecule, a 3’ exonuclease, off the 3’ end. *

A DNA polymerase binds to the open DNA using the undamaged strand as a
template and fills in the gap. This general system is known as Base
Excision Repair.

![*Figure: Base excision repair*](./img/BaseReplacement.gif)

In the human genome there are over [130 genes devoted to repairing
damaged DNA](http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/291/5507/1284).
[[video with lots of misspelled
words](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g4khROaOO6c)].

<embed width="420" height="345" src="http://www.youtube.com/v/ATwQnrDP8L0" type="application/x-shockwave-flash"> </embed>

* * * * *

**Mutations and evolution:**

Mutations are the ultimate source of genetic variation - without them
evolution would be impossible. Mutations can lead to a number of
effects, and they can create new activities.

At the same time these changes may reduce the activity of an important
gene.

![*Figure: Mutations and their possible affects*](./img/mutation.jpg)
  

Such “molecular level” conflicts could greatly limit evolution. This problem is avoided 
by the fact that genomes are not static, there are processes of gene duplication and 
genome rearrangements that occur continuously. Such events even occur during embryonic 
development, not all cells in your body have exactly the same genome. 
[[link](http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev.genom.9.081307.164217)][[link](http://salk.academia.edu/MikeMcConnell/Papers/287571/LINE-1_retrotransposons_mediators_of_somatic_variation_in_neuronal_genomes)]

![*Figure: Gene duplication and new genes*](./img/gene%20duplication%20and%20neofunction.jpg)

* * * * *

**Mutations and human disease** [[Genes & Disease handbook]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/disease/Cockayne.html)\


While they are essential for evolution, defects in DNA synthesis can
lead to a number of diseases. For example, let us consider the
[trinucleotide repeat
disorders](http://www.stanford.edu/group/hopes/cgi-bin/wordpress/2010/06/trinucleotide-repeat-disorders/).

These diseases are caused by slippage of DNA polymerase and the
subsequent duplication of sequences.

![*Figure: DNA mutations can result from enzyme slippage*](./img/slippage.jpg)

There are a number of “triplet repeat” diseases, including several forms
of mental retardation, Huntington disease, inherited ataxias, and
muscular dystrophy.

When these “slippable” repeats occur in a region of DNA encoding a
protein, it can lead to regions of a repeated amino acids.

For example, expansion of a domain of CAGs in the gene encoding the
polypeptide Huntingtin causes the neurological disorder Huntingdon’s
chorea.

* * * * *

[![triplet
repeat](./img/triple-repeat-diseases.jpg)](http://www.wiley-vch.de/books/sample/3527306528_c01.pdf)

*Figure: Trinucleotide repeat disorders [[review link](http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/pdf/10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.113042)]*

* * * * *

[**Fragile X:**](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19422761) This
replication defect is the leading form of autism of known cause. Sadly,
there are many forms of autism in which the cause is not known. Only
about 6% of all autistic individuals have fragile X.

Fragile X can also lead to anxiety disorders, attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder, psychosis, and obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Because the mutation involves the FMR-1gene, which is located on the X
chromosome, the disease is sex-linked and effects mainly males (who are
XY, compared to XX females).

In the unaffected population, the FMR-1 gene contains between 6 to 50
copies of a CGG repeat. Individuals with 6 to 50 repeats are
phenotypically normal.

Those with 50 to 200 repeats carry what is known as a premutation; these
individuals rarely display symptoms but can transmit the disease to
their children.

Those with more than 200 repeats typically display symptoms and often
have what appears to be a broken X chromosome - from which the disease
derives its name.

The pathogenic sequence in Fragile X is downstream of the FMR1 gene’s
coding region. When this region expands, it inhibits the gene’s
activity. [[recent review on the disease
mechanism](http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/pdf/10.1146/annurev-pathol-011811-132457)]

[![ ](./img/fragile.jpg)](http://www.fragilex.org/)_ ![ ](./img/fraile2.jpg)

*Figure: Fragile X chromosome showing the characteristic fragile site (left) and the position of the FMR-1 gene (right)*

Defects in DNA repair can lead to severe diseases and often a
susceptibility to cancer.

For example, defects in mismatch repair lead to a susceptibility to
colon cancer, while defects in translation-coupled DNA repair are
associated with Cockayne syndrome. [[OMIN
entry](http://omim.org/entry/216400)]

People with Cockayne’s syndrome are sensitive to light, short and appear
to age prematurely.

[![ ](./img/Cockayne.gif)](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK22190/)

*Figure: Individual with Cockayne syndrome*

* * * * *

**Genes and alleles:**A gene is a region of DNA that encodes a gene
product, together with the sequences required for its proper expression.
Genes can overlap with one another, particularly in terms of their
regulatory regions, and defining the full regulatory regions of a gene
can be difficult. A gene’s regulatory regions may span many kilobases of
DNA and be located upstream, downstream, or both of the coding region.

An allele then is any version of the gene that differs from another in
terms of nucleotide sequence. Often the most common version of an allele
is referred to as the wild type version. That said, there are often
multiple common alleles in the population, and they all may be equally
normal in terms of the phenotype(s) they produce (although more or less
frequent).

When we compare alleles, we think about the effects of differences on
the expression and/or behavior of the gene product, but it is important
to remember that most gene products work in concert with the products of
multiple other genes, so the total set of alleles in an organism, its
**genotype,** will determine its **phenotype** (together with
environmental factors).

Two alleles can produce quite similar gene products, or their products
can be different. An allele can produce a gene product with completely
normal function or absolutely no functioning product (referred to as a
null or **amorphic** allele). It can have less function than the “wild
type” allele (**hypomorphic**), more function than the wild type
(**hypermorphic**), or a new function (**neomorphic**).

Given that many gene products function as part of a multimeric complex
and that many organisms (like us) are diploid, there is one more
possibility, the product of one allele can antagonize the activity of
the other - this is known as an **antimorphic** allele.These different
types of alleles were defined genetically by Herbert Muller (who won the
Nobel prize for showing that X-rays could induce mutations, that is, new
alleles.)

![*Figure: Herbert Muller*](./img/Muller.jpg)

* * * * *

**Questions to answer**

1.  What happens in cells with defects in DNA repair systems when they
    attempt to divide?
2.  I thought RNA primers were used to make DNA! So why is there no
    uracil in a DNA molecule?
3.  A base is lost, how is this loss recognized by repair systems?
4.  How could a DNA duplication lead to the production of a totally new
    gene (rather than just two copies of a preexisting gene)?
5.  How does a mutation generate an new allele? And what exactly is the
    difference between a gene and an allele?
6.  What would be a reasonable way to determine that you had defined an
    entire gene?

**Questions to ponder**

-   Given that DNA is unstable, why hasn’t evolution used a different
    type of molecule to store genetic information?
-   Is it possible to build a system in which mutations do not occur?
-   Would such an “error-free” memory system be evolutionarily
    successful?

* * * * *