##Storing energy in molecules and gradients

* * * * *

There are a number of ways that cells store energy. The synthesis of ATP
from adenosine diphosphate ADP and inorganic phosphate (Pi) is the most
familiar.

As you (hopefully) appreciate, whenever a bond is formed, energy is
released - it always takes energy to break a bond

  ---
   
  ---

Generally, the energy required to break bonds comes from the kinetic
energy of surrounding molecules (similarly the energy released upon bond
formation is often transformed into kinetic energy).

  ---
   
  ---

When we think about a molecule like ATP and energy, we have to consider
all of the bonds that are broken and formed in the process.

ATP is typically formed from ADP and Pi. We have to break a number of
rather stable bonds in both ADP and Pi to form the new and rather
unstable ADP- Pi bond in ATP. [what makes ATP unstable?]

![](../../BioFun-Support/AllGraphics/bond%20breaking%20and%20formation.jpg)

  ---
   
  ---

Another class of “high energy/low stability” molecules involves the
reduction of certain compounds. For example, the addition of two
electrons and a proton to nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD**^+^**)
leads to the formation of the high energy/unstable molecule NADH.

Similarly, the addition of two electrons and two protons to flavin
adenine dinucleotide (FAD) leads to the formation of FADH~2~**.**

Both NADH and FADH~2~ are high energy/unstable compounds, like ATP. When
electrons are removed from NAPH or FADH~2~, that is when these molecules
are oxidized, this energy is released, and NAD^+^ and FAD are
regenerated.

The energy carried by NADH and FADH~2~ is used to drive a number of
cellular reactions, it can also be used to generate ATP.

[![\*\* PLEASE DESCRIBE THIS IMAGE
\*\*](../../BioFun-Support/AllGraphics/NAD.jpg)](#)

* * * * *

[![\*\* PLEASE DESCRIBE THIS IMAGE
\*\*](../../BioFun-Support/AllGraphics/mitchell.jpg)](http://www.nobel.se/chemistry/laureates/1978/mitchell-bio.html)

How does the cell use the energy stored in NADH and FADH~2~ to make ATP?
The answer came from the work of an eccentric British scientist, [Peter
Mitchell](http://www.biology.ucsd.edu/%7Emsaier/transport/petermitchell/one.html)**[.](http://www.biology.ucsd.edu/%7Emsaier/transport/petermitchell/one.html)**
It is known as the chemiosmotic hypothesis.

Mitchell proposed that the energy held in NADH and FADH~2~ was used to
generate a concentration gradient of H^+^ across the plasma membrane in
bacterial cells.

  --
  --

Electrons, removed from NADH or FADH~2~, pass through an electron
transport chain.

The electron transport chain is a set of membrane proteins that interact
with one another in pairs of redox reactions.

As high energy electrons move from one component of the electron
transport chain to the next, the first is oxidized, the second is
reduced, some energy is "bled-off’ and used to pump H^+^s out of the
cell, forming an H^+^ concentration gradient across the membrane.

  --
  --

**ATP synthases** consist of two parts, the F~o~ membrane channel and
the F~1~ ATP synthase. The ATP synthase mediates a series of coupled
reactions. The first is the movement of H^+^s down their concentration
gradient (through the ATP synthase).

The ATP synthase couples this thermodynamically favorable reaction with
a second reaction, the ADP + Pi ↔ ATP + H~2~O reaction, which is
thermodynamically unfavorable.

It is worth noting that there is nothing about this reaction that stops
it (under the right conditions) from running backward. When this occurs,
the ATP synthase acts as an ATPase and a pump that can move H^+^s
against its concentration gradient.

  --
  --

As H+s move through the ATP synthase, the molecule rotates, this
rotation “forces” ADP + Pi together to form ATP.

This is a higher magnification view of the process, where you can see
ADP and Pi binding, ATP formation, and then release.

* * * * *

  --
  --

**Back to electrons:** So where do the electrons end up? They have to go
somewhere!

O~2~ is a very efficient oxidizer, that is, an acceptor of electrons
from other molecules. In the presence of O~2~ and an electron transport
chain, NADH and FADH~2~ are oxidized to form NAD^+^ and FADH (they are
recycled).

The electrons pass through the electron transport chain, as they move
H^+^s are moved across the membrane to form a H^+^ gradient.

![\*\* PLEASE DESCRIBE THIS IMAGE
\*\*](../../BioFun-Support/AllGraphics/respire.gif)

  --
  --

Eventually four of these electrons (and four H^+^s) are added to two
O~2~s, creating two water molecules. Again this is a thermodynamically
favorable reaction.

Under aerobic conditions (that is in the presence of O~2~), glucose can
be broken down completely to CO~2~ and H~2~O; much (\~60%) of the energy
originally present in the glucose molecule is captured as ATP (what
happens to the rest?)

In the absence of O~2~, that is under anaerobic conditions, the
breakdown of pyruvate to CO~2~ and H~2~O cannot occur - the energy in
pyruvate is unavailable to the cell.

  --
  --

![\*\* PLEASE DESCRIBE THIS IMAGE
\*\*](../../BioFun-Support/AllGraphics/anaerobic.gif)

The cell contains limited amounts of NAD^+^ and NADH (can you imagine
why?)

In order for a cell to continue to metabolize glucose, it must
regenerate its NAD^+^. In the absence of O~2~, the regeneration of
NAD^+^ involves the oxidation of NADH by pyruvate.

Most of the energy present in the glucose molecule is still present in
products of this reaction; only about 6% of the energy present in
glucose is captured in the absence of molecular oxygen.

* * * * *

Questions to answer

\

1.  When a bond forms, where does the energy go?
2.  What would happen to a cell’s ability to make ATP if it where
    exposed to a H^+^ carrier or channel?
3.  In your body, describe a situation in which glucose might be
    metabolized to water and carbon dioxide.
4.  Where or when might pyruvate (or some other intermediate)
    accumulate?

Questions to ponder\

-   Which do you think would have an evolutionary advantage, an organism
    growing aerobically on anaerobically?
-   How do environmental conditions influence your answer?

* * * * *

  --
  --

* * * * *

[![arrow](../../BioFun-Support/AllGraphics/ArrowLEFT.GIF)](../../Biofundamentals-2012/lectureNotes-Revision/Topic2G_Capturing%20Energy.htm)

[![\*\* PLEASE DESCRIBE THIS IMAGE
\*\*](../../BioFun-Support/AllGraphics/ArrowUP.GIF)](#TOP)

revised 17-Apr-2013

[![\*\* PLEASE DESCRIBE THIS IMAGE
\*\*](../../BioFun-Support/AllGraphics/ArrowRIGHT.gif)](Topic2I_Symbiosis.htm)
